Flink Delta Sink - Docs (#236)
delta-io/connectors: flink-connector/README.md

# Flink Delta Lake Connector

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)

Official Delta Lake connector for [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/).

# Introduction

This is the repository for Apache Flink connector to Delta Lake. It includes

- Sink for directly writing data from Apache Flink's applications to a Delta tables
- Source for reading Delta Lake's table using Apache Flink (still in progress)

# Building

The project is compiled using [SBT](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/Command-Line-Reference.html).

> ## Flink connector

Reviewer: this section header is superfluous. this readme is only for Flink connector so .. why have section here

> Flink Delta Lake Connector is a JVM library to read and write data from Apache Flink applications' to a Delta Lake

Reviewer: this is repeating the intro once again.. consolidate this in the intro section and simplify the building section

tables utilizing [Delta Standalone JVM library](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors).

NOTE:

- currently only sink is supported which means that this connectors supports only writing to a Delta table and is not
  able to read from it,
- Flink DeltaSink provides exactly-one delivery guarantees

For more details see:

- [Delta Standalone Reader](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/wiki/Delta-Standalone-Reader)
- [Delta Standalone Writer](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/wiki/Delta-Standalone-Writer) <TODO>

### Build commands

- To compile the project, run `build/sbt flinkConnector/compile`
- To test the project, run `build/sbt flinkConnector/test`
- To publish the JAR, run `build/sbt flinkConnector/publishM2`

> ### How to use it

Reviewer: How to use it should not be a under "Building". It should be a top-level section likee
- Intro
- Usage
- Building

# Flink Delta Lake Connector

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)

Official Delta Lake connector for [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/).

# Introduction

This is the repository for Apache Flink connector to Delta Lake. It includes

> - Flink Delta Sink for directly writing data from Apache Flink's applications to a Delta Lake's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sink for directly writing data from Apache Flink's applications to a Delta tables
```

  table

> - source for reading Delta Lake's table using Apache Flink

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Source for reading Delta Lake's table using Apache Flink (still in progress)
```

Please refer to the [official design doc](
https://docs.google.com/document/d/19CU4eJuBXOwW7FC58uSqyCbcLTsgvQ5P1zoPOPgUSpI/edit)

> if you want to learn more about the internals of the connector.

Reviewer: No need to have this here. Very few people will need this. i added the link in the flink issue. so we can point to the issue. but do it at the end of the doc. maybe have a "Additional Resources" section

to a Delta Lake tables
utilizing [Delta Standalone JVM library](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors).

NOTE:

- currently only sink is supported which means that this connectors supports only writing to a Delta
  table and is not able to read from it,
- Flink DeltaSink provides exactly-one delivery guarantees

For more details see:

- [Delta Standalone Reader](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/wiki/Delta-Standalone-Reader)
- [Delta Standalone Writer](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/wiki/Delta-Standalone-Writer) <TODO>

### Build commands

- To compile the project, run `build/sbt flinkConnector/compile`
- To test the project, run `build/sbt flinkConnector/test`
- To publish the JAR, run `build/sbt flinkConnector/publishM2`

### How to use it

You can add the Flink Connector library as a dependency using your favorite build tool.

#### Maven

Scala 2.12:

```xml

<project>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.delta</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-connector</artifactId>
            <version>0.2.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>

>             <groupId>io.delta</groupId>

Reviewer: why do you need to explicitly add standalone? that is transitive dependency and should be automatically added.

            <artifactId>delta-standalone_2.12</artifactId>
            <version>0.2.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>

>             <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>

Reviewer: again .. these are compile time dependencies .. isnt it? user's shouldnt have to add this unless they want to use a specific version of flink in their application

            <artifactId>flink-runtime</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-table-runtime-blink_2.12</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-table-common</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
            <artifactId>flink-parquet_2.12</artifactId>
            <version>${flink-version}</version>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.apache.hadoop</groupId>
            <artifactId>hadoop-client</artifactId>
            <version>${hadoop-version}</version>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</project>
```

> Scala 2.11:

Reviewer: wait... if flink depends on standalone which is scala-specific....then even if we release a single jar of flink ... we still have to have different sbt configurations for different versions of scala to bring in the necessary scala-specific standalone...isnt it?

> # Flink Delta Lake Connector

Reviewer: why do you need the above empty directories?

Author: I assume you mean `example_table` and `example_partitioned_table` ?
Those are the directories that the example project uses as target paths for its Delta's tables. 
With every run of the example project (before starting the in-memory Flink job) those dirs are being emptied and recreated so we can easily remove them, but i thought that we may as well leave them in the example dir to explicitly indicate for the users where they should look for created tables and written data/delta log.

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)

Official Delta Lake connector for [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/).

# Introduction

Flink Delta Lake Connector is a JVM library to read and write data from Apache Flink applications' to a Delta Lake

> tables utilizing [Delta Standalone JVM library](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors). It includes

Author: corrected

> tables utilizing [Delta Standalone JVM library](https://github.com/delta-io/connectors). It includes

Author: corrected

> - Sink for writing data from Apache Flink to a Delta tables

Author: corrected

- Source for reading Delta Lake's table using Apache Flink (still in progress)

NOTE:

- currently only sink is supported which means that this connectors supports only writing to a Delta table and is not

>   able to read from it,

Author: corrected

        deltaSinkBuilder.withBucketAssigner(partitionAssigner);
        DeltaSink<RowData> deltaSink = deltaSinkBuilder.build();

        stream.sinkTo(deltaSink);
        return stream;
    }

    static class MultiplePartitioningColumnComputer implements
        DeltaTablePartitionAssigner.DeltaPartitionComputer<RowData> {

        @Override
        public LinkedHashMap<String, String> generatePartitionValues(
            RowData element, BucketAssigner.Context context) {
            String name = element.getString(0).toString();
            int age = element.getInt(2);
            LinkedHashMap<String, String> partitionSpec = new LinkedHashMap<>();
            partitionSpec.put("name", name);
            partitionSpec.put("age", Integer.toString(age));
            return partitionSpec;
        }
    }
}
```

### Frequently asked questions (FAQ)

#### Can I use this connector to read data from a Delta Lake table?

No, currently we are supporting only writing to a Delta Lake table. `DeltaSource` with the support for reading data from
Delta's tables will be added in future releases.

#### Can I use this connector to append data to a Delta Lake Table?

> Yes, you can use this connector to append data to either an existing or a new Delta Lake Table (if there is no existing

Reviewer 2: `Delta Lake table` (lowercase `t`)

Delta Log in a given path then it will be created by the connector).

#### Can I use this connector with other modes (overwrite, upsert etc.) ?

No, currently only append is supported, other modes may be added in future releases.

#### Do I need to specify the partition columns when creating a Delta table?

If you are using DataStream API then you have to provide a
`org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.sink.filesystem.BucketAssigner` instance while building the sink instace. You
are free to roll out your own implementation of bucket assigner or use utility one provided by the connector

> as `delta.io.flink.DeltaTablePartitionAssigner`.

Reviewer 2: can you include a link to the example showing this?

#### Why do I need to specify the table schema? Shouldn’t it exist in the underlying Delta table metadata or cannot be extracted from the stream's metadata?

Unfortunately we cannot extract schema information from a generic DataStream and it is also required for interacting
with DeltaLog. The sink must be aware of both Delta table's schema and the structure of the events in the stream in
order not to violate the integrity of the table.

#### What if I change the underlying Delta table schema ?

Next commit (after mentioned schema change) performed from the DeltaSink to a DeltaLog will fail unless you will

> set `shouldTryUpdateSchema` param to true. In such case DeltaStandaloneWriter will try to merge both schemas and check

Reviewer 2: `Delta Standalone`

for their compatibility. If this check will fail (e.g. the change consisted of removing a column) so will the DeltaLog's

> commit which will cause failure of the Flink job.

Reviewer 2: then what? how would users recover from this state?

Author: they don't, at least automatically. i believe this is what we have specified and agreed on within the design doc - if the DeltaLog's commit fails because of some sort of schema incompatibility then it cannot be automatically resolved by the connector and we should fail the job to let the user perform a validation.

Are you suggesting that we should put some comment like `such situation may require some manual user's validation in order to retain the table's consistency` ?
